10th March Statement, 1965

Once again we solemnly remember the day when the innocent and unarmed people of Tibet rose in spontaneous revolt against the Chinese (Imperialists) conquerors. Six years have rolled by since that memorable date, but the grim spectre of tragedy still stalks our holy land; tyranny and oppression still continue, and the sufferings of our people cannot be described in words.

The General Assembly of the United Nations has twice called for the cessation of the inhuman practices against the people of Tibet. I have myself on several occasions appealed for a just and equitable settlement of this tragic problem. But, as the International Commission of Jurists has recently pointed out, “neither the Resolution of the General Assembly nor the call of human conscience has had any effect upon Communist Chinese policy.” The Commission, which comprises eminent and outstanding jurists of international repute, has also asserted that “most of the liberties proclaimed by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, including those fundamental civil, religious, social and economic rights with which the Rule of Law is concerned, do not exist under the Chinese rule in Tibet.” But it is not only the flagrant breaches of human rights and fundamental freedoms from which the people of Tibet are suffering today. What is still more grave is the fact that the Chinese authorities in Tibet are virtually denying that Tibetans are human beings and cherish and entertain the feelings and sentiments of human beings. Thus the Tibetans are being driven from their lands to make room for Chinese settlers. They are being systematically deprived of their only sources of livelihood: in Chinese calculations, the life of a Tibetan has no value at all. It is true that the Chinese authorities vehemently deny all this. But there exists overwhelming evidence against such denials. In the first place, thousands of Tibetans have braved the hazards and rigours of a long and troublesome journey and sought refuge in the neighbouring States. Surely, if their life had been tolerable at all they would not have left their hearths and homes for an uncertain future. Secondly, the recent events in Tibet also clearly demonstrate that the declarations of the Chinese authorities are totally unfounded. For instance, the recent public denigration of the Panchen Lama by the Chinese authorities in Peking provides impeachable evidence of the gravity of the situation in Tibet. It should be remembered that the Panchen Lama was born in Chinese-occupied territory and was educated and trained in China. He owed his position to Chinese support. But no Tibetan worth the name could fail to protest against the oppression and tyranny of the Chinese conquerors. Hence it is that the Panchen Lama is now being branded by the Chinese authorities as a stooge of the Imperialists, for it is the invariable practice of the Chinese authorities to condemn anyone who criticises their measures and policies in the interests of humanity as a puppet of the Imperialists powers, however mild and fair such criticism might be.

This being the situation today, it is necessary for us, Tibetans and other peace-loving people alike, to rouse the conscience of the world and to lodge a strong protest against the barbarous and inhuman treatment of the Tibetans by the Chinese conquerors. Today, I wish to call upon all Tibetans to renew their faith and once again determine to do what lies in their power for the restoration of peace and freedom to their beloved motherland. Today, in the name of humanity I call upon all the peoples of the world to come to the rescue of the unfortunate and unhappy people of Tibet.

I also wish to take this opportunity to emphasise the extreme danger of the present situation. We all know of the naked and brutal aggression by the Chinese armies against the territorial integrity of India despite the repeated attempts made by the government of India to befriend the Chinese Republic. That naked aggression should provide the evidence, if any evidence were necessary, of the threat to Peace of Asia posed by China. I firmly believe that as long as the Chinese remain in occupation of Tibet, there will always be a threat to the peace and progress of the countries in Asia and South-East Asia. The gravity of the situation has been aggravated by the recent nuclear test by the government of China. So far, the nuclear powers have shown considerable restraint because they fully realise that the use of nuclear weapons would be disastrous to mankind. Would the Chinese authorities exercise a similar restraint once they are in possession of fully developed nuclear weapons? I fear such a restraint could not be reasonably expected from a government whose insensate and godless ambition knows no bounds. I, therefore, sincerely hope and pray that the peoples of the world will foresee the danger that threatens us all.

On this day as on other days, I pray for the peace and happiness of all beings.

The Dalai Lama
March 10, 1965